Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about a word.
I think this is the first time we’ve
ever actually done this, focussed only
on a single word, but there are few
words in modern English that arouse
such passion and create such division,
few words that have been weaponised
in such a short period of time.
And that word is “woke”.
To those who embrace the word, it means
being aware of social injustice, aware
of discrimination, understanding that the
world is structured in an unfair way, and
being prepared to do something about it.
But to its detractors, its critics,
it’s an insult, it’s used to describe
someone who is virtue signalling,
claiming to be morally better than
other people, and is not prepared to
listen to any other point of view.
So, in this episode we are going to
explore the evolution of this word, a
word that is more than a word, actually,
it’s a state of mind, a shorthand for a
whole set of values and attitudes, which
are either espoused vigorously by the
believer or despised by its adversaries.
Ok then, let’s get right into it
and look at the evolution of woke.
Now, if we are going to spend an
entire episode talking about a word,
we should first define what that
word means, and the first place
we should look is the dictionary.
If you were to consult a dictionary
20 years ago, you would probably
only have found one definition.
It would say something like “the
past tense of wake”, and might
give
you examples like “I woke up this
morning”, or even “I woke this morning”.
And of course, you can still use the word
like that, it’s the past tense of “wake”,
absolutely nothing has changed since then.
But you would see another definition
today, a definition that in many
dictionaries actually now comes above
the original definition, meaning it’s
the more common usage of the word.
And in fact, this definition is
often split into two separate
definitions, which reflects how
polarising the word has become.
So, let me give you the definition
from the Merriam Webster dictionary.
The first definition is, and I’m
quoting directly, “aware of and
actively attentive to important
societal facts and issues [especially
issues of racial and social justice]”
And the second definition is, and again
this is a direct quote, “politically
liberal [ as in matters of racial and
social justice] especially in a way that
is considered unreasonable or extreme”.
And only after this, coming
in at the third definition, do
you find the original literal
definition of what this word means.
Now, this third definition, the original
literal definition, is easy to understand
and less controversial, I mean, it
simply refers to not being asleep.
So we will focus our attention today
on the first two, the definitions
of “woke” that are more to do with
ideology and what you believe rather
than simply your physical state.
Now, in terms of where this word,
“woke”, came from in this context,
it was originally slang, or
vernacular, used by African Americans
going as far back as the 1940s.
On one level, it was used as an
alternative to woken or awake,
so “I’m woke, I’m coming”,
like “I’m awake, I’m coming”.
But it also had another meaning,
meaning if you were “woke” you were
aware of the societal injustice faced
by the African-American community.
Its first use in print is thought to come
from all the way back in 1962, in a New
York Times article by an African-American
author called William Melvin Kelley.
The article’s title was “If You’re
Woke You Dig It”, and it talked
about dialect and language in
1960s America, in particular the
language used by African-Americans.
Importantly, this essay wasn’t about
social injustice, police violence, or
any kind of ideological point of view.
He was simply explaining how language is
used, and how slang terms, or idiomatic
language would be discarded, not used
any more when they become mainstream.
We’ll come back to this idea in a
few minutes, and it will be important
when we look at the development of
being “woke” in the 21st century.
Anyway, back to the 1960s.
The term continued to be used as
African-American Vernacular, as a slang.
Its most famous next use case then
came a decade later, when a character
in a 1971 play about the Jamaican
political activist, Marcus Garvey,
said ‘I been sleeping all my life.
And now that Mr.
Garvey done woke me up, I’m gon stay woke.
And I’m gon' help him
wake up other black folk’.
So, the term existed, and it was
used, but it wasn’t really until
the 21st century that “woke”
was brought into the mainstream.
One of the first people to publicise
this word was the singer Erykah Badu,
who used the lyrics, ‘I stay woke’,
in her 2008 song Master Teacher.
And moving into the 2010s, the expression
continued to grow in popularity and
mainstream usage, and after the police
shooting of an unarmed 18-year-old African
American called Michael Brown, and the
formation of The Black Lives Matter
movement, it shot to public prominence.
Black Lives Matter, or BLM, was
formed in 2013, and this group really
embraced the term “woke”, and “stay
woke”, and promoted the use of the
hashtag “#staywoke” on social media.
And what did this mean?
Well, it meant that you were aware
of racial injustice, you were aware
of the fact that police violence
falls disproportionately on African
Americans, that is, if you are an
African American you are over twice as
likely to be shot and killed by police
than if you are a white American.
And importantly, “staying woke”
meant that you were prepared
to do something about it.
Protesting in the street, entering
grassroots politics, you were
prepared to do something about
the injustices in the system.
You would see people with posters
or t-shirts with the “Stay Woke”
message written on them, and the term
entered the public consciousness,
on both sides of the Atlantic, in
the United States and in the UK.
In 2017, in fact, this “new”
definition was added to the Oxford
English Dictionary, which is always
slightly behind with these things,
but this gives you an idea of
quite how mainstream it had become.
But as often happens, when a term that
was previously used, created, owned
even, by one particular group of people,
when this term goes into the mainstream,
especially when it is a term about an
ideological viewpoint, the definition
was twisted and used to mean something
completely different, it’s used against
the original creators of the term.
And if you remember our second definition
of “woke”, from the start of the episode,
of “politically liberal [as in matters
of racial and social justice] especially
in a way that is considered unreasonable
or extreme”, woke has become an insult
when used by certain types of people.
If you were to watch Fox News, or
read a right-wing newspaper, you
would find all manner of references
to wokeness in a negative light.
Here’s one from Fox News
at the start of 2020.
And by the way, remember that Fox
News is the most popular cable
news show in the United States.
So, here’s Tucker Carlson, the most
popular cable news host in American
history, with an average of 3.3
million viewers every single night:
wokeness is a virus.
It's infectious.
It destroys your brain.
You're watching it happen
to people all around you.
Certainly on the left, some running
for president, many working at CNN.
So, to repeat, he says
“wokeness is a virus.
It’s infectious, it destroys your brain”.
And here’s another clip from someone
whose voice you probably will recognise:
Because woke means you're, a loser.
Everybody ultimately loses with woke.
And yes, that was the former
President, Donald Trump, saying
that “woke means you’re a loser”.
So, how did one term, one idea, being
“woke”, go from being aware of social
issues to being an infectious virus that
destroys your brain, making you a loser?
Well, on one level, we must go
back to the original New York
Times article from 1962, the one
titled “If You’re Woke You Dig It”.
If you remember, Kelly, the author,
wrote that as soon as a term becomes
mainstream, it is no longer used by the
group or people who originally used it,
it becomes polluted and untouchable.
And this is, to a certain extent,
what happened with the term “woke”.
In the aftermath of the Black Lives
Matter movement, as people and also
companies became more publicly aware
of social injustice, the term moved
further into the mainstream, and took
on an altogether different meaning.
Companies started to publicly pledge
their support for social movements and
racial equality, with some even going as
far as describing themselves as “woke”.
Was this because the leaders of the
companies truly believed in what they were
saying, or was it because they needed to
appeal to a new generation both of social
justice aware consumers and employees, and
being woke was “just good for business”?
I’ll leave you to be the judge
of that, but many companies were
criticised for what was perceived
as piggybacking, jumping on the
bandwagon, of a social movement.
And as this happened, the
term “woke” became even more
politicised, weaponised, and binary.
You were either woke, or you were
not, there was no “middle ground”.
To the critics of “woke” ideology, this
was seen as virtue signalling, when
someone shows off their beliefs so as
to display their moral superiority,
that they are a better human being
because they believe something.
And, given this new binary nature, of one
either being woke or not being woke, to
critics of “wokeism”, this word epitomised
what they believed as liberal extremism.
Wokeness meant a refusal to debate issues,
being overly sensitive, viewing everything
that happens in the world through a lens
of social injustice and looking down
on anyone with a different ideology.
And as a result, “woke” took on a
completely different, pejorative,
negative meaning, it became an insult.
Right wing talk show hosts talked
about The Woke Mob, The Woke Police,
Going Woke, The Woke Warrior Class,
The Wokerati, and Woke Capitalism.
As you heard Tucker Carlson and
Donald Trump saying a few minutes
ago, it was presented as a virus
that infected the mind, something
that nothing good could come from.
Now, clearly, the issue of social
injustice, discrimination, and political
polarisation are huge issues, far too
large to do justice to in a short episode
like this, so instead I want to keep
the focus on the evolution of the term,
rather than go down the rabbit hole of
the rights and wrongs of both sides.
What is undeniable is that the term,
“woke”, is now used far more frequently
in a critical sense, by critics of the
ideology, rather than its proponents.
This isn’t, of course, so unusual.
It's simply joining a long list of
terms that had one meaning when used
by one group of people, then was
used by another group either as a
positive or negative term by people
on the other side of the argument.
Liberal, is one example, “politically
correct” is another one, which
have both gone from being simple
descriptive terms to weaponised insults.
Gay is another - it originally simply
meant “happy”, then it was used
to mean “homosexual”, and was also
used by some groups as an insult
to mean “bad” or “undesirable”.
And another, which is coming from a
slightly different angle, is the "N-word",
which was originally used as an ethnic
slur, an insulting term for black people.
But, as you may know, it’s used
by some African Americans as a
colloquial term, it’s been embraced
and has gone from an insult to a
term of camaraderie, of endearment.
So, this brings us to today, and to
the status of the word “woke” in 2023.
Will you still see people using it?
Yes, probably, but more commonly as an
insult rather than in its original sense.
To the original proponents of the word
“woke”, this is pretty depressing news.
In an interview with the woman who wrote
the “I stay woke” lyrics of the Erykah
Badu song, the journalist wrote “Like
anything created by black people, the
phrase “stay woke” was appropriated by
the masses, transformed into a trend
term before ultimately mutating into
a meme and becoming a form of irony.”
Essentially, it was taken, stolen
and used as an insult, meaning it
can’t be used in its original sense.
And the result of all of this, to
quote the same article is that,
“being woke isn’t fucking fun.”
There are many different conclusions
we might draw from this, from how the
meaning of the word “woke” has changed and
evolved in such a short period of time.
Firstly, I think it’s yet another
example of the power of a single
word, of how a word can come to
stand for much more than it means.
Secondly, it might be to ask ourselves
whether one group should have ownership
over a particular word or phrase?
And what happens if that
ownership, that agency, is lost?
Thirdly, it’s that the greater the
number of people who say that they
identify with a particular word, the
less powerful that word often becomes.
Its meaning becomes diluted, and
even if the message might have been
powerful to begin with, it’s harder
to understand what it really means.
And on a related note, finally,
it’s that having more supporters
doesn’t always yield better results.
In the case of woke, it’s clear that the
more people and companies jumped on the
bandwagon, or claimed to hold certain
socially progressive beliefs when their
actions spoke otherwise, this opened up
the entire woke movement for criticism
and gave people like Tucker Carlson
and Donald Trump the ammunition to
criticise the entire movement, everyone
who identified with the word “woke”.
This being said, the past 10 years or so
have “woken” many people to the social
injustices, not just in America but in
pretty much every country in the world.
And looking to the future, while the
word “woke” might be dead in the water,
no matter how much Donald Trump might
say it’s for losers, it’s clear that
the ideas behind it are alive and well.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on the history and
evolution of the word “woke”.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Were you aware of this term before
today, and if so, what impact has
woke  ideology had in your country?
What do you think is next
for “staying woke”, both the
term and the idea behind it?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.